.TH OMETIS 1
.SH NAME
ometis \- multilevel recursive nested dissection algorithm
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ometis
.I GraphFile
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ometis
produces a fill reducing ordering of the graph stored in
.I GraphFile.
This ordering is used for performing sparse Cholesky factorization.
The algorithm used by
.B ometis
is a nested dissection algorithm that uses multilevel graph bisection
to find small separators.
The computed ordering is stored in a file named
.I GraphFile.perm.


.SH FORMAT OF INPUT FILE
A graph 
.B G = (V, E) 
with 
.B n 
vertices and 
.B m 
edges is stored in a plain
text file that contains 
.B n+1 
lines.
The first line contains information about the size and the type of the graph,
while the remaining 
.B n 
lines contain information for each vertex of 
.B G
.
Any line that starts with 
.B % 
is a comment line and is skipped.

.PP
The first line contains two integers. The first integer
is the number of vertices and the second is the number of edges. 

.PP
After this first line, the remaining 
.B n 
lines store the adjacency lists for each
vertex-one line per vertex.
In particular, the 
.B i^th 
line (excluding comment lines) contains the adjacency list of the 
.B (i-1)^st 
vertex.
Note that the numbering starts from 1 (not from 0 as it is done in C).


.SH FORMAT OF OUTPUT FILE
The permutation file of a graph with 
.B n
vertices also consists of 
.B n
lines with a single number per line. The 
.B i^th 
line of the permutation file contains the new order of the 
.B i^th 
vertex of the graph. Let 
.B A
be the matrix whose nonzero elements correspond to graph 
.B G, 
and let 
.B P 
be the permutation vector produced by 
.B ometis.
Row (column) 
.B i 
of 
.B A 
is mapped to row (column) 
.B P[i] 
of the reordered matrix.


.SH ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTATION
A postscript copy of the manual of 
.B METIS
that describes 
.B ometis
and other similar algorithms is available on WWW at:
.B http://www.cs.umn.edu/~karypis/metis/manual.ps


.SH AUTHOR
George Karypis
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Diagnostic messages are intended to be self-explanatory.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
metis(1), OMETIS(3)
.SH BUGS
If you find any bugs please report them to
.B karypis@cs.umn.edu
.
