.TH PMETIS 1
.SH NAME
pmetis \- multilevel recursive bisection graph partitioner
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pmetis
.I GraphFile
.I Nparts
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pmetis
partitions the graph stored in
.I GraphFile
into 
.I Nparts 
using an algorithm that is based on multilevel recursive bisection. 
The result of the partition is stored in a file named
.I GraphFile.part.Nparts.

.PP
.I Nparts
can be any number greater than one and less than the number of vertices in the
graph. 


.SH FORMAT OF INPUT FILE
A graph 
.B G = (V, E) 
with 
.B n 
vertices and 
.B m 
edges is stored in a plain
text file that contains 
.B n+1 
lines.
The first line contains information about the size and the type of the graph,
while the remaining 
.B n 
lines contain information for each vertex of 
.B G
.
Any line that starts with 
.B % 
is a comment line and is skipped.

.PP
The first line contains either two or three integers. The first integer
is the number of vertices, the second is the number of edges, and
the third integer 
.B fmt 
contains information about the
type of the graph. In particular, depending on the value of 
.B fmt, 
the graph can have weights on the edges, vertices, or both.
In the case that the graph is unweighted, (ie., all vertices and edges have the
same weight),
.B fmt
is omitted.

.PP
After this first line, the remaining 
.B n 
lines store the adjacency lists for each
vertex-one line per vertex.
In particular, the 
.B i^th 
line (excluding comment lines) contains the adjacency list of the 
.B (i-1)^st 
vertex.
Note that the numbering starts from 1 (not from 0 as it is done in C).

.PP
The simplest format for a graph is when the weight of all vertices and the weight
of all the edges is the same.
However, there are cases in which the edges in 
.B G
have different weights. 
In that case, the adjacency list of each vertex contains in addition to the vertices
that is connected with, the weight of the edges.
If 
.B v
has 
.B k 
vertices adjacent to it, then the graph file contains
.B 2*k
numbers, each pair of numbers stores the vertex that 
.B v 
is connected to, and the
weight of the edge. Note, edge weights are integer quantities.
Furthermore, note that the 
.B fmt 
parameter is equal to 
.B 1
indicating the fact that the graph has weights on the edges.

.PP
Finally, in addition to having weights on the edges, weights on the vertices
are also allowed.
In this case, the value of 
.B fmt
is equal to
.B 11
and each line of the graph file first stores the weight of the vertex, 
and then the weighted adjacency list.
As was the case with edge weights, vertex weights are integer quantities.


.SH FORMAT OF OUTPUT FILE
The partition file of a graph with 
.B n
vertices, consists of 
.B n
lines with a single number per line. 
The 
.B i^th 
line of the file contains the partition number that the 
.B i^th 
vertex belongs to. Partition numbers start from 0, and partitions are assigned 
in a hypercube fashion.

.SH ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTATION
A postscript copy of the manual of 
.B METIS
that describes 
.B pmetis
and other similar algorithms is available on WWW at:
.B http://www.cs.umn.edu/~karypis/metis/manual.ps


.SH AUTHOR
George Karypis
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Diagnostic messages are intended to be self-explanatory.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
metis(1), kmetis(1), PMETIS(3)
.SH BUGS
If you find any bugs please report them to
.B karypis@cs.umn.edu
.
